THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
Last updated:-13-3-2020
_________
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
__________
Preamble.                                                               PART I
RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I. –– PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title.
Extent.
Commencement of Act.
2. [Repealed.]
3. Interpretation-clause.
“Court”.
“Fact”.
“Relevant”.
“Facts in issue”.
“Document”.
“Evidence”.
“Proved”.
“Disproved”.
“Not proved”.
“India”.
4.   “May Presume.”
“Shall presume.”
“Conclusive proof”.
CHAPTER II. ––OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
5. Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts.
6. Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction.
7. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in issue.
8. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.
9. Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts.
10. Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design.
11. When facts not otherwise relevant become relevant.
12. In suits for damages, facts tending to enable Court to determine amount are relevant.
13. Facts relevant when right or custom is in question.
SECTIONS
14. Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body, or bodily feeling.
15. Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or intentional.
16. Existence of course of business when relevant.
ADMISSIONS
17. Admission defined.
18. Admission––
by party to proceeding or his agent;
by suitor in representative character;
by party interested in subject-matter;
by person from whom interest derived.
19. Admissions by persons whose position must be proved as against party to suit.
20. Admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to suit.
21.  Proof of admissions against persons making them, and by or on their behalf.
22. When oral admissions as to contents of documents are relevant.
22A. When oral admission as to contents of electronic records are relevant.
23. Admissions in civil cases when relevant.
24. Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when irrelevant in criminal proceeding.
25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved.
26. Confession by accused while in custody of Police not to be proved against him.
27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.
28. Confession made after removal of impression caused by inducement, threat or promise, relevant.
29. Confession otherwise relevant not to become irrelevant because of promise of secrecy, etc.
30. Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and others jointly under trial for
same offence.
31. Admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop.
STATEMENTS BY PERSONS WHO CANNOT BE CALLED AS WITNESSES
32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is
relevant.
When it relates to cause of death;
or is made in course of business;
or against interest of maker;
or gives opinion as to public right or custom, or matters of general interest;
or relates to existence of relationship;
or is made in will or deed relating to family affairs;
or in document relating to transaction mentioned in section 13, clause (a);
or is made by several persons and expresses feelings relevant to matter in question.
SECTIONS
33. Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceeding, the truth of facts therein
stated.
STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
34. Entries in books of account when relevant.
35. Relevancy of entry in public record made in performance of duty.
36. Relevancy of statements in maps, charts and plans.
37. Relevancy of statement as to fact of public nature contained in certain Acts or notifications.
38. Relevancy of statements as to any law contained in law-books.
HOW MUCH OF A STATEMENT IS TO BE PROVED
39. What evidence to be given when statement forms part of a conversation, document, electronic
record, book or series of letters or papers.
JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE WHEN RELEVANT
40. Previous judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.
41. Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc., jurisdiction.
42. Relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in section 41.
43. Judgments, etc., other than those mentioned in sections 40, 41 and 42, when relevant.
44. Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or incompetency of Court, may be proved.
OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS WHEN RELEVANT
45. Opinions of experts.
45A. Opinion of Examiner of Electronic Evidence.
46. Facts bearing upon opinions of experts.
47. Opinion as to handwriting, when relevant.
47A. Opinion as to digital signature, when relevant.
48. Opinion as to existence of right or custom, when relevant.
49. Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when relevant.
50. Opinion on relationship, when relevant.
51. Grounds of opinion, when relevant.
CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
52. In civil cases character to prove conduct imputed, irrelevant.
53. In criminal cases previous good character relevant.
53A. Evidence of character or previous sexual experience not relevant in certain cases.
54. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.
55. Character as affecting damages.
PART II
ON PROOF
CHAPTER III.—FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
56. Fact judicially noticeable need not be proved.
SECTIONS
57. Facts of which Court must take judicial notice.
58. Facts admitted need not be proved.
CHAPTER IV.—OF ORAL EVIDENCE
59. Proof of facts by oral evidence.
60. Oral evidence must be direct.
CHAPTER V.— OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
61. Proof of contents of documents.
62. Primary evidence.
63. Secondary evidence.
64. Proof of documents by primary evidence.
65. Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given.
65A. Special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic record.
65B. Admissibility of electronic records.
66. Rules as to notice to produce.
67. Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or written document
produced.
67A. Proof as to electronic signature.
68. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested.
69. Proof where no attesting witness found.
70. Admission of execution by party to attested document.
71. Proof when attesting witness denies the execution.
72. Proof of document not required by law to be attested.
73. Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved.
73A. Proof as to verification of digital signature.
PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
74. Public documents.
75. Private documents.
76. Certified copies of public documents.
77. Proof of documents by production of certified copies.
78. Proof of other official documents.
PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
79. Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies.
80. Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence.
81. Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, private Acts of Parliament and other documents.
81A.  Presumption as to Gazettes in electronic forms.
82. Presumption as to document admissible in England without proof of seal or signature.
SECTIONS
83. Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of Government.
84. Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of decisions.
85. Presumptions as to powers-of-attorney.
85A. Presumption as to electronic agreements.
85B. Presumption as to electronic records and electronic signatures.
85C. Presumption as to Electronic Signature Certificates.
86. Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records.
87. Presumption as to books, maps and charts.
88. Presumption as to telegraphic messages.
88A. Presumption as to electronic messages.
89. Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced.
90. Presumption as to documents thirty years old.
90A. Presumption as to electronic records five years old.
CHAPTER VI.–– OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
91. Evidence of terms of contracts, grants and other dispositions of property reduced to form of
document.
92. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.
93. Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous document.
94. Exclusion of evidence against application of document to existing facts.
95. Evidence as to document unmeaning in reference to existing facts.
96. Evidence as to application of language which can apply to one only of several persons.
97. Evidence as to application of language to one of two sets of facts, to neither of which the whole
correctly applies.
98. Evidence as to meaning of illegible characters, etc.
99. Who may give evidence of agreement varying terms of document.
100. Saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating to wills.
PART III
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII.–– OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
101. Burden of proof.
102. On whom burden of proof lies.
103. Burden of proof as to particular fact.
104. Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible.
105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions.
SECTIONS
106. Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge.
107. Burden of proving death of person known to have been alive within thirty years.
108. Burden of proving that person is alive who has not been heard of for seven years.
109. Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord and tenant, principal and
agent.
110. Burden of proof as to ownership.
111. Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of active confidence.
111A. Presumption as to certain offences.
112. Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy.
113. Proof of cession of territory.
113A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.
113B. Presumption as to dowry death.
114. Court may presume existence of certain facts.
114A. Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for rape
CHAPTER VIII.––ESTOPPEL
115. Estoppel.
116. Estoppel of tenants and of licensee of person in possession.
117. Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or licensee.
CHAPTER IX.—OF WITNESSES
118. Who may testify.
119. Witness unable to communicate verbally.
120. Parties to civil suit, and their wives or husbands. Husband or wife of person under criminal trial.
121. Judges and Magistrates.
122. Communications during marriage.
123. Evidence as to affairs of State.
124. Official communications.
125. Information as to commission of offences.
126. Professional communications.
127. Section 126 to apply to interpreters, etc.
128. Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence.
129. Confidential communications with legal advisers.
130. Production of title-deeds of witness not a party.
131. Production of documents or electronic records which another person, having possession, could
refuse to produce.
SECTIONS
132. Witness not excused from answering on ground that answer will criminate.
Proviso.
133. Accomplice.
134. Number of witnesses.
CHAPTER X.––OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
135. Order of production and examination of witnesses.
136. Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence.
137. Examination-in-chief.
Cross-examination.
Re-examination.
138. Order of examinations.
Direction of re-examination.
139. Cross-examination of person called to produce a document.
140. Witnesses to character.
141. Leading questions.
142. When they must not be asked.
143. When they may be asked.
144. Evidence as to matters in writing.
145. Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing.
146. Questions lawful in cross-examination.
147. When witness to be compelled to answer.
148. Court to decide when question shall be asked and when witness compelled to answer.
149. Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds.
150. Procedure of Court in case of question being asked without reasonable grounds.
151. Indecent and scandalous questions.
152. Questions intended to insult or annoy.
153. Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions testing veracity.
154. Question by party to his own witness.
155. Impeaching credit of witness.
156. Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact, admissible.
157. Former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate later testimony as to same fact.
158. What matters may be proved in connection with proved statement relevant under
section 32 or 33.
SECTIONS
159. Refreshing memory.
When witness may use copy of document to refresh memory.
160. Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in section159.
161. Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory.
162. Production of documents.
Translation of documents.
163. Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice.
164. Using, as evidence, of document production of which was refused on notice.
165. Judge’s power to put questions or order production.
166. Power of jury or assessors to put questions.
CHAPTER XI.–– OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE
167.  No new trial for improper admission or rejection of evidence.
THE SCHEDULE –– [Repealed.]
THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
ACT NO. 1 OF 18721
[15th March, 1872.]
Preamble.—WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate, define and amend the law of Evidence; It is
hereby enacted as follows: —
PART I
RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I.––PRELIMINARY
1. Short title. ––This Act may be called the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
Extent.––It extends to the whole of India 2[ 3***] and applies to all judicial proceedings in or before
any Court, including Courts-martial, 4[other than Courts-martial convened under the Army Act (44 & 45
Vict., c. 58)] 5[the Naval Discipline Act [29 & 30 Vict., 109]; or 6*** the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act,
1934 (34 of 1934),] 7[or the Air Force Act (7 Geo. 5, c. 51)] but not to affidavits8 presented to any Court
or officer, nor to proceedings before an arbitrator;
Commencement of Act.––And it shall come into force on the first day of September, 1872.
2.  [Repeal of enactments.].––Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and Schedule.
3. Interpretation-clause.––In this Act the following words and expressions are used in the following
senses, unless a contrary intention appears from the context: ––
“Court”.––“Court” includes all Judges9 and Magistrates10, and all persons, except arbitrators,
legally authorised to take evidence.
“Fact”.––“Fact” means and includes––(1) anything, state of things, or relation of things, capable
of being perceived by the senses;
(2) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.
Illustrations
(a) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain place, is a fact.
(b) That a man heard or saw something, is a fact.
(c) That a man said certain words, is a fact.
(d) That a man holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good faith or fraudulently, or uses a
particular word in a particular sense, or is or was at a specified time conscious of a particular sensation, is a fact.
(e) That a man has a certain reputation, is a fact.
1.  The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Schedule, extended to and brought into force
in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I (w.e.f. 1-7-1965) and to the whole of the Union territory of
Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965 (w.e.f. 1-10-1967). The Act came into force in Pondicherry on 1-10-1963 vide Reg. 7 of 1963,
s. 3 and Schedule I. The Act has been amended in West Bengal by West Bengal Act 20 of 1960 and in Tamil Nadu by Tamil
Nadu Act 67 of 1979.
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “except Part B States”.
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31-10-
2019).
3. Ins. by Act 18 of 1919, s. 2 and the First Schedule.
4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Schedule.
5. The words “that Act as modified by” Omitted by the A.O. 1950.
6. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule.
7. As to practice relating to affidavits, See the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 30 (c) and the First Schedule,
Order XIX. See also the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974), ss. 295 and 297.
8. Cf. the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 2, the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), s. 19; and for a definition
of “District Judge”, the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3(17).
9. Cf. the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3(32) and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).
“Relevant”. ––  One fact is said to be relevant to another when the one is connected with the other in
any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Act relating to the relevancy of facts.
“Facts in issue”.–– The expression “facts in issue” means and includes––
any fact from which, either by itself or in connection with other facts, the existence,
non-existence, nature or extent of any right, liability, or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or
proceeding, necessarily follows.
Explanation.––Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being in force relating to Civil
Procedure,1 any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be asserted or denied in the answer to such issue
is a fact in issue.
Illustrations
A is accused of the murder of B.
At his trial the following facts may be in issue:––
That A caused B’s death;
That A intended to cause B’s death;
That A had received grave and sudden provocation from B;
That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B’s death, was, by reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable
of knowing its nature.
“Document”. ––“Document” 2means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by
means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may
be used, for the purpose of recording that matter.
Illustrations
A writing3 is a document;
3Words printed lithographed or photographed are documents;
A map or plan is a document;
An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document;
A caricature is a document.
“Evidence”. ––“Evidence” means and includes ––
(1) all statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses, in
relation to matters of fact under inquiry;
such statements are called oral evidence;
(2) 4[all documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of the Court;]
such documents are called documentary evidence.
“Proved”.––A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court either
believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the
circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.
“Disproved”.––A fact is said to be disproved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court
either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence so probable that a prudent man
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908); as to the settlement of issues, see Schedule I, order XIV.
2. Cf. the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), s. 29 and the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3 (18).
3. Cf. definition of “writing” in the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3(65).
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule, for the words “all documents produced for the inspection of the
Court” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it does not exist.
“Not proved”. –– A fact is said not to be proved when it is neither proved nor disproved.
1[“India”. –– “India” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.]
2[the expressions “Certifying Authority”, “3[electronic signature]”,
4[(Electronic Signature
Certificate], “electronic form”, “electronic records”, “information”, “secure electronic record”, “secure
digital signature” and “subscriber” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).]
4. “May presume”.––Whenever it is provided by this Act that the Court may presume a fact, it may
either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved, or may call for proof of it.
“Shall presume”.––Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall presume a fact, it shall
regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved.
“Conclusive proof”.––When one fact is declared by this Act to be conclusive proof of another, the
Court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given
for the purpose of disproving it.
CHAPTER II. –– OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
5. Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts. ––Evidence may be given in any suit
or proceeding of the existence of non-existence of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are
hereinafter declared to be relevant, and of no others.
Explanation.––This section shall not enable any person to give evidence of a fact which he is
disentitled to prove by any provision of the law for the time being in force relating to Civil Procedure5.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of causing his death.
At A’s trial the following facts are in issue:––
A’s beating B with the club;
A’s causing B’s death by such beating;
A’s intention to cause B’s death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him, and have in readiness for production at the first hearing of the
case, a bond on which he relies. This section does not enable him to produce the bond or prove its
contents at a subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in accordance with the conditions
prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure5.
6. Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction.––Facts which, though not in issue, are so
connected with a fact in issue as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred
at the same time and place or at different times and places.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A or B or the by-standers
at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as to form part of the transaction, is a relevant fact.
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for the definitions of “State” and “States” which were ins. by the A.O. 1950.
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule, (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
4. Subs. by s. 52, ibid., for “Digital Signature Certificate” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
5. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).
(b) A is accused of waging war against the 1[Government of India] by taking part in an armed insurrection in
which property is destroyed, troops are attacked and gaols are broken open. The occurrence of these facts is
relevant, as forming part of the general transaction, though A may not have been present at all of them.
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a correspondence. Letters between the parties
relating to the subject out of which the libel arose, and forming part of the correspondence in which it is
contained, are relevant facts, though they do not contain the libel itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered to A. The goods were delivered to
several intermediate persons successively. Each delivery is a relevant fact.
7. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in issue. –– Facts which are the occasion,
cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevant facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the state of
things under which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction,
are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B.
The facts that, shortly before the robbery, B went to a fair with money in his possession, and that he showed it,
or mentioned the fact that he had it, to third persons, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B.
Marks on the ground, produced by a struggle at or near the place where the murder was committed, are relevant
facts.
(c) The question is, whether A poisoned B.
The state of B’s health before the symptoms ascribed to poison, and habits of B, known to A, which afforded an
opportunity for the administration of poison, are relevant facts.
8. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.––Any fact is relevant which shows or
constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.
The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding, in reference to such
suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any
person an offence against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences
or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.
Explanation 1.––The word “conduct” in this section does not include statements, unless those
statements accompany and explain acts other than statements; but this explanation is not to affect the
relevancy of statements under any other section of this Act.
Explanation 2.––When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to him or in his
presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B.
The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had murdered C, and that B had tried to extort money
from A by threatening to make his knowledge public, are relevant.
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money, B denies the making of the bond.
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Queen”.
The fact that, at the time when the bond was alleged to be made, B required money for a particular
purpose, is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison.
The fact that, before the death of B, A procured poison similar to that which was administered to B, is
relevant.
(d) The question is, whether a certain document is the will of A.
The facts that, not long before, the date of the alleged will, A made inquiry into matters to which the
provisions of the alleged will relate; that he consulted vakils in reference to making the will, and that he
caused drafts of other wills to be prepared, of which he did not approve, are relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime.
The facts that, either before, or at the time of, or after the alleged crime, A provided evidence which
would tend to give to the facts of the case an appearance favourable to himself, or that he destroyed or
concealed evidence, or prevented the presence or procured the absence of persons who might have been
witnesses, or suborned persons to give false evidence respecting it, are relevant.
(f) The question is, whether A robbed B.
The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in A’s presence –– “the police are coming to look for the
man who robbed B,” and that immediately afterwards A ran away, are relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A owes B rupees 10,000.
The facts that A asked C to lend him money, and that D said to C in A’s presence and hearing–– “I
advise you not to trust A, for he owes B 10,000 rupees,” and that A went away without making any
answer, are relevant facts.
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime.
The fact that A absconded, after receiving a letter, warning him that inquiry was being made for the
criminal, and the contents of the letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime.
The facts that, after the commission of the alleged crime, he absconded, or was in possession of
property or the proceeds of property acquired by the crime, or attempted to conceal things which were or
might have been used in committing it, are relevant.
(j) The question is, whether A was ravished.
The facts that, shortly after the alleged rape, she made a complaint relating to the crime, the
circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant.
The fact that, without making a complaint, she said that she had been ravished is not relevant as
conduct under this section, though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under section 32, clause (1),
or as corroborative evidence under section 157.
(k) The question is, whether A was robbed.
The fact that, soon after the alleged robbery, he made a complaint relating to the offence, the
circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant.
The fact that he said he had been robbed, without making any complaint, is not relevant, as conduct
under this section, though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under section 32, clause (1), or as
corroborative evidence under section 157.
9. Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts.––Facts necessary to explain or introduce
a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or
relevant fact, or which establish the identity of any thing or person whose identity is relevant, or fix the
time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of parties by
whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that purpose.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A.
The state of A’s property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.
(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A; B affirms that the matter alleged to be libellous is
true.
The position and relations of the parties at the time when the libel was published may be relevant facts as
introductory to the facts in issue.
The particulars of a dispute between A and B about a matter unconnected with the alleged libel are irrelevant,
though the fact that there was a dispute may be relevant if it affected the relations between A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime.
The fact that, soon after the commission of the crime, A absconded from his house, is relevant under section 8,
as conduct subsequent to and affected by facts in issue.
The fact that, at the time when he left home, he had sudden and urgent business at the place to which he went, is
relevant, as tending to explain the fact that he left home suddenly.
The details of the business on which he left are not relevant, except in so far as they are necessary to show that
the business was sudden and urgent.
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made by him with A. C, on leaving A’s service, says
to A –– “I am leaving you because B has made me a better offer.” This statement is a relevant fact as explanatory of
C’s conduct, which is relevant as a fact in issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen property to B, who is seen to give it to A’s wife. B says as he
delivers it––“A says you are to hide this.” B’s statement is relevant as explanatory of a fact which is part of the
transaction.
(f) A is tried for a riot and is proved to have marched at the head of a mob. The cries of the mob are relevant as
explanatory of the nature of the transaction.
10. Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design.––Where there is reasonable
ground to believe that two or more persons have conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable
wrong, anything said, done or written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention, after
the time when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against each of the
persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the existence of the conspiracy as for
the purpose of showing that any such person was a party to it.
Illustrations
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to wage war against the 1[Government
of India].
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published writings advocating the object in
view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the
contents of a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant, both to prove the existence
of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and
although the persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may have taken place
before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it.
11. When facts not otherwise relevant become relevant.––Facts not otherwise relevant are
relevant––
(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
(2) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or non-existence of
any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at Calcutta on a certain day.
The fact that, on that day, A was at Lahore is relevant.
The fact that, near the time when the crime was committed, A was at a distance from the place where it was
committed, which would render it highly improbable, though not impossible, that he committed it, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime.
The circumstances are such that the crime must have been committed either by A, B, C or D. Every fact which
shows that the crime could have been committed by no one else, and that it was not committed by either B, C or D,
is relevant.
12. In suits for damages, facts tending to enable Court to determine amount are relevant. –– In
suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the Court to determine the amount of
damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant.
13. Facts relevant when right or custom is in question.––Where the question is as to the existence
of any right or custom, the following facts are relevant:––
(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created, claimed, modified,
recognised, asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its existence;
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognised or exercised, or in
which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Queen”.
Illustrations
The question is, whether A has a right to a fishery.
A deed conferring the fishery on A’s ancestors, a mortgage of the fishery by A’s father, a subsequent grant of
the fishery by A’s father, irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances in which A’s father exercised the
right, or in which the exercise of the right was stopped by A’s neighbours, are relevant facts.
14. Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body of bodily feeling.––Facts showing the
existence of any state of mind such as intention, knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or
good-will towards any particular person, or showing the existence of any state of body or bodily feeling,
are relevant, when the existence of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue or relevant.
1[Explanation 1.––A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of mind must show that
the state of mind exists, not generally, but in reference to the particular matter in question.
Explanation 2.––But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the previous
commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of this section, the previous
conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact.2]
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. It is proved that he was in possession of a
particular stolen article.
The fact that, at the same time, he was in possession of many other stolen articles is relevant, as tending to show
that he knew each and all of the articles of which he was in possession to be stolen.
3[(b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another person a counterfeit coin which, at the time when he
delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit.
The fact that, at the time of its delivery, A was possessed of a number of other pieces of counterfeit coin is
relevant.
The fact that A had been previously convicted of delivering to another person as genuine a counterfeit coin
knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.]
(c) A sues B for damage done by a dog of B’s, which B knew to be ferocious.
The fact that the dog had previously bitten X, Y and Z, and that they had made complaints to B, are relevant.
(d) The question is, whether A, the acceptor of a bill of exchange, knew that the name of the payee was
fictitious.
The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same manner before they could have been transmitted to
him by the payee if the payee had been a real person, is relevant, as showing that A knew that the payee was a
fictitious person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imputation intended to harm the reputation of B.
The fact of previous publications by A respecting B, showing ill-will on the part of A towards B is relevant, as
proving A’s intention to harm B’s reputation by the particular publication in question.
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 1(I), for the Original Explanation.
2. See the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), s. 311.
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 1(2), ibid. for the original Illustration (b).
The facts that there was no previous quarrel between A and B, and that A repeated the matter complained of as
he heard it, are relevant, as showing that A did not intend to harm the reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent, whereby B, being induced to trust C,
who was insolvent, suffered loss.
The fact that, at the time when A represented C to be solvent, C was supposed to be solvent by his neighbours
and by persons dealing with him, is relevant, as showing that A made the representation in good faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house of which A is owner, by the order of C, a
contractor.
A’s defence is that B’s contract was with C.
The fact that A paid C for the work in question is relevant, as proving that A did, in good faith, make over to C
the management of the work in question, so that C was in a position to contract with B on C’s own account, and not
as agent for A.
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of property which he had found, and the question is whether,
when he appropriated it, he believed in good faith that the real owner could not be found.
The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been given in the place where A was, is relevant, as
showing that A did not in good faith believe that the real owner of the property could not be found.
The fact that A knew, or had reason to believe, that the notice was given fraudulently by C, who had heard of
the loss of the property and wished to set up a false claim to it, is relevant, as showing that the fact that A knew of
the notice did not disprove A’s good faith.
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him. In order to show A’s intent the fact of A’s having
previously shot at B may be proved.
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening letters previously sent by A to B may be
proved, as showing the intention of the letters.
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards B, his wife.
Expressions of their feeling towards each other shortly before or after the alleged cruelty are relevant facts.
(l) The question is whether A’s death was caused by poison.
Statements made by A during his illness as to his symptoms are relevant facts.
(m) The question is, what was the state of A’s health at the time when an assurance on his life was effected.
Statements made by A as to the state of his health at or near the time in question are relevant facts.
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a carriage for hire not reasonably fit for use, whereby A was
injured.
The fact that B’s attention was drawn on other occasions to the defect of that particular carriage is relevant.
The fact that B was habitually negligent about the carriages which he let to hire is irrelevant.
(o) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him dead.
The fact that A on other occasions shot at B is relevant as showing his intention to shoot B.
The fact that A was in the habit of shooting at people with intent to murder them is irrelevant.
(p) A is tried for a crime.
The fact that he said something indicating an intention to commit that particular crime is relevant.
The fact that he said something indicating a general disposition to commit crimes of that class is
irrelevant.
15. Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or intentional.––When there is a
question whether an act was accidental or intentional, 1[or done with a particular knowledge or intention,]
the fact that such act formed part of a series of similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing the
act was concerned, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of burning down his house in order to obtain money for which it is insured.
The facts that A lived in several houses successively each of which he insured, in each of which a fire occurred,
and after each of which fires A received payment from a different insurance office, are relevant, as tending to show
that the fires were not accidental.
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors of B. It is A’s duty to make entries in a book showing the
amounts received by him. He makes an entry showing that on a particular occasion he received less than he really
did receive.
The question is, whether this false entry was accidental or intentional.
The facts that other entries made by A in the same book are false, and that the false entry is in each case in
favour of A, are relevant.
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a counterfeit rupee.
The question is, whether the delivery of the rupee was accidental.
The facts that, soon before or soon after the delivery to B, A delivered counterfeit rupees to C, D and E are
relevant, as showing that the delivery to B was not accidental
16. Existence of course of business when relevant.––When there is a question whether a particular
act was done, the existence of any course of business, according to which it naturally would have been
done, is a relevant fact.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was despatched.
The facts that it was the ordinary course of business for all letters put in a certain place to be carried to the post,
and that particular letter was put in that place are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reached A. The facts that it was posted in due course, and was not
returned through the Dead Letter Office, are relevant.
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 2.
ADMISSIONS
17. Admission defined.––An admission is a statement, 1[oral or documentary or contained in
electronic form], which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made
by any of the persons, and under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.
18. Admission by party to proceeding or his agent.––Statements made by a party to the
proceeding, or by an agent to any such party, whom the Court regards, under the circumstances of the
case, as expressly or impliedly authorised by him to make them, are admissions.
by suitor in representative character.––Statements made by parties to suits suing or sued in a
representative character, are not admissions, unless they were made while the party making them held that
character.
Statements made by
––
(1) by party interested in subject-matter.––persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest
in the subject-matter of the proceeding, and who make the statement in their character of persons so
interested, or
(2) by person from whom interest derived.––persons from whom the parties to the suit have
derived their interest in the subject-matter of the suit,
are admissions, if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the persons making the
statements.
19. Admissions by persons whose position must be proved as against party to suit. ––Statements
made by persons whose position or liability, it is necessary to prove as against any party to the suit, are
admissions, if such statements would be relevant as against such persons in relation to such position or
liability in a suit brought by or against them, and if they are made whilst the person making them
occupies such position or is subject to such liability.
Illustration
A undertakes to collect rents for B.
B sues A for not collecting rent due from C to B.
A denies that rent was due from C to B.
A statement by C that he owed B rent is an admission, and is a relevant fact as against A, if A denies that C did
owe rent to B.
20. Admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to suit. ––Statements made by persons
to whom a party to the suit has expressly referred for information in reference to a matter in dispute are
admissions.
Illustration
The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound.
A says to B –– “Go and ask C, C knows all about it.” C’s statement is an admission.
21. Proof of admissions against persons making them, and by or on their behalf.––Admissions
are relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes them, or his representative in interest;
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule, for “oral or documentary,” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who makes them or by his representative in
interest, except in the following cases:––
(1) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it is of such a nature
that, if the person making it were dead, it would be relevant as between third persons under section 32.
(2) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it consists of a
statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant or in issue, made at or about the time
when such state of mind or body existed, and is accompanied by conduct rendering its falsehood
improbable.
(3) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, if it is relevant otherwise
than as an admission.
Illustrations
(a) The question between A and B is whether a certain deed is or is not forged. A affirms that it is genuine, B
that it is forged.
A may prove a statement by B that the deed is genuine, and B may prove a statement by A that deed is forged;
but A cannot prove a statement by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can B prove a statement by himself that the
deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away.
Evidence is given to show that the ship was taken out of her proper course.
A produces a book kept by him in the ordinary course of his business showing observations alleged to have
been taken by him from day to day, and indicating that the ship was not taken out of her proper course. A may prove
these statements, because they would be admissible between third parties, if he were dead, under section 32, clause
(2).
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Calcutta.
He produces a letter written by himself and dated at Lahore on that day, and bearing the Lahore post-mark of
that day.
The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because, if A were dead, it would be admissible under
section 32, clause (2).
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen.
He offers to prove that he refused to sell them below their value.
A may prove these statements, though they are admissions, because they are explanatory of conduct influenced
by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit coin which he knew to be counterfeit.
He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine the coin as he doubted whether it was counterfeit or
not, and that that person did examine it and told him it was genuine.
A may prove these facts for the reasons stated in the last preceding illustration.
22. When oral admissions as to contents of documents are relevant.––Oral admissions as to the
contents of a document are not relevant, unless and until the party proposing to prove them shows that he
is entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of such document under the rules hereinafter
contained, or unless the genuineness of a document produced is in question.
1[22A. When oral admission as to contents of electronic records are relevant.––Oral admissions
as to the contents of electronic records are not relevant, unless the genuineness of the electronic record
produced is in question.]
23. Admissions in civil cases when relevant.––In civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is made
either upon an express condition that evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances from which
the Court can infer that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.
Explanation.––Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt any barrister, pleader, attorney or
vakil from giving evidence of any matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under
section 126.
24. Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when irrelevant in criminal
proceeding.––A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if the
making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement, threat or 2promise
having reference to the charge against the accused person, proceeding from a person in authority and
sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person grounds which would appear to him
reasonable for supposing that by making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal
nature in reference to the proceedings against him.
25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved.––No confession made to a police-officer3, shall
be proved as against a person accused of any offence.
26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him.––No
confession made by any person whilst he is in the custody of a police-officer, unless it be made in the
immediate presence of a Magistrate4, shall be proved as against such person.
5[Explanation.––In this section “Magistrate” does not include the head of a village discharging
magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George 6*** or elsewhere, unless such headman is a
Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
18827 (10 of 1882).]
27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.––Provided that, when any
fact is deposed to as discovered inconsequence of information received from a person accused of any
offence, in the custody of a police-officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.
28. Confession made after removal of impression caused by inducement, threat or promise,
relevant.––If such a confession as is referred to in section 24 is made after the impression caused by any
such inducement, threat or promise has, in the opinion of the Court, been fully removed, it is relevant.
29. Confession otherwise relevant not to become irrelevant because of promise of secrecy,
etc.––If such a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not become irrelevant merely because it was
made under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a deception practiced on the accused person for
the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
2. For prohibition of such inducements, etc., see the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act of 1974), s. 316.
3. As to statements made to police-officer investigating a case, see s. 162, ibid.
4. A coroner has been declared to be a Magistrate for the Purposes of this section, see the coroners Act, 1871(Act 4 of 1871),
s. 20.
5. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 3.
6. The words “or in Burma” rep. by the A.O. 1937.
7. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).
he need not have answered, whatever may have been the form of those questions, or because he was not
warned that he was not bound to make such confession, and that evidence of it might be given against
him.
30. Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and others jointly under trial
for same offence.––When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a
confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved, the
Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other person as well as against the
person who makes such confession.
1[Explanation.––“Offence,” as used in this section, includes the abetment of, or attempt to commit,
the offence.]2
Illustrations
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved that A said––“B and I murdered C”. The
Court may consider the effect of this confession as against B.
(b) A is on his trial for the murder of C. There is evidence to show that C was murdered by A and B,
and that B said ––“A and I murdered C”.
This statement may not be taken into consideration by the Court against A, as B is not being jointly
tried.
31. Admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop.––Admissions are not conclusive proof of the
matters admitted but they may operate as estoppels under the provisions hereinafter contained.
STATEMENTS BY PERSONS WHO CANNOT BE CALLED AS WITNESSES
32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is
relevant. –– Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be
found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an
amount of delay or expense which under the circumstances of the case appears to the Court unreasonable, are
themselves relevant facts in the following cases: ––
(1) When it relates to cause of death.––When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of
his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which
the cause of that person’s death comes into question.
Such statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when
they were made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in which
the cause of his death comes into question.
(2) or is made in course of business.––When the statement was made by such person in the ordinary
course of business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by him in books
kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional duty; or of an acknowledgement
written or signed by him of the receipt of money, goods, securities or property of any kind; or of a
document used in commerce written or signed by him; or of the date of a letter or other document usually
dated, written or signed by him.
(3) or against interest of maker.––When the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest
of the person making it, or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him to a criminal
prosecution or to a suit for damages.
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 4.
2. Cf. the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), Explanation 4 to s. 108.
(4) or gives opinion as to public right or custom, or matters of general interest.––When the
statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence of any public right or custom or matter
of public or general interest, of the existence of which, if it existed, he would have been likely to be
aware, and when such statement was made before any controversy as to such right, custom or matter
had arisen.
(5) or relates to existence of relationship.––When the statement relates to the existence of any
relationship 1[by blood, marriage or adoption] between persons as to whose relationship 1[by blood,
marriage or adoption] the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and when the
statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.
(6) or is made in will or deed relating to family affairs.––When the statement relates to the
existence of any relationship 1[by blood, marriage or adoption] between persons deceased, and is made in
any will or deed relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person belonged, or in
any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which such statements are
usually made, and when such statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.
(7) or in document relating to transaction mentioned in section 13, clause (a).––When the
statement is contained in any deed, will or other document which relates to any such transaction as is
mentioned in section 13, clause (a).
(8) or is made by several persons and expresses feelings relevant to matter in question.––When
the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed feelings or impressions on their part
relevant to the matter in question.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A was murdered by B; or
A dies of injuries received in a transaction in the course of which she was ravished. The question is
whether she was ravished by B; or
The question is, whether A was killed by B under such circumstances that a suit would lie against B by A’s
widow.
Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her death, referring respectively to the murder, the rape and
the actionable wrong under consideration, are relevant facts.
(b) The question is as to the date of A’s birth.
An entry in the diary of a deceased surgeon regularly kept in the course of business, stating that, on a given day
he attended A’s mother and delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact.
(c) The question is, whether A was in Calcutta on a given day.
A statement in the diary of a deceased solicitor, regularly kept in the course of business, that on a given day
the solicitor attended A at a place mentioned, in Calcutta, for the purpose of conferring with him upon specified
business, is a relevant fact.
(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Bombay harbour on a given day.
A letter written by a deceased member of a merchant’s firm by which she was chartered to their correspondents
in London, to whom the cargo was consigned, stating that the ship sailed on a given day from Bombay harbour, is a
relevant fact.
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 2.
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land.
A letter from A’s deceased agent to A, saying that he had received the rent on A’s account and held it at A’s
orders is a relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally married.
The statement of a deceased clergyman that he married them under such circumstances that the celebration
would be a crime, is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter on a certain day. The fact that a
letter written by him is dated on that day is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship.
A protest made by the Captain, whose attendance cannot be procured, is a relevant fact.
(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public way.
A statement by A, a deceased headman of the village, that the road was public, is a relevant fact.
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day in a particular market.
A statement of the price, made by a deceased banya in the ordinary course of his business, is a relevant fact.
(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B.
A statement by A that B was his son, is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A.
A letter from A’s deceased father to a friend, announcing the birth of A on a given day, is a relevant fact.
(m) The question is, whether, and when, A and B were married.
An entry in a memorandum book by C, the deceased father of B, of his daughter’s marriage with A on a given
date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caricature exposed in a shop window. The question is as to the
similarity of the caricature and its libellous character. The remarks of a crowd of spectators on these points may be
proved.
33. Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceeding, the truth of facts
therein stated.––Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person authorised
by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later
stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which it states, when the witness is dead or
cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if
his presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of
the case, the Court considers unreasonable:
Provided ––
that the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives in interest; that the adverse
party in the first proceeding had the right and opportunity to cross-examine;
that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the second proceeding.
Explanation.––A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between the prosecutor
and the accused within the meaning of this section.
STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
34. Entries in books of account when relevant.––1[Entries in the books of account, including those
maintained in an electronic form], regularly kept in the course of business, are relevant whenever they
refer to a matter into which the Court has to inquire, but such statements shall not alone be sufficient
evidence to charge any person with liability.
Illustration
A sues B for Rs. 1,000, and shows entries in his account books showing B to be indebted to him to this amount.
The entries are relevant, but are not sufficient, without other evidence, to prove the debt.
35. Relevancy of entry in public record made in performance of duty.–– An entry in any public or
other official book, register or 2[record or an electronic record], stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and
made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of a
duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in which such book, register or 2[record or an electronic
record], is kept, is itself a relevant fact.
36. Relevancy of statements in maps, charts and plans.––Statements of facts in issue or relevant
facts, made in published maps or charts generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under
the authority of 3[the Central Government or any State Government], as to matters usually represented or
stated in such maps, charts or plans, are themselves relevant facts.
37. Relevancy of statement as to fact of public nature contained in certain Acts or
notifications. ––When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public nature,
any statement of it, made in a recital contained in any Act of Parliament 4[of the United Kingdom] or in
any 5[Central Act, Provincial Act or 6[a State Act] or in a Government notification or notification by the
Crown Representative appearing in the Official Gazette or in any printed paper purporting to be the
London Gazette or the Government Gazette of any Dominion, colony or possession of his Majesty is a
relevant fact].
7*
*
*
*
*
38. Relevancy of statements as to any law contained in law-books.––When the Court has to form
an opinion as to a law of any country, any statement of such law contained in a book purporting to be
printed or published under the authority of the Government of such country and to contain any such law,
and any report of a ruling of the Courts of such country contained in a book purporting to be a report of
such rulings, is relevant.
HOW MUCH OF A STATEMENT IS TO BE PROVED
8[39. What evidence to be given when statement forms part of a conversation, document,
electronic record, book or series of letters or papers.––When any statement of which evidence is given
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule, for “entries in the books of account” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
2. Subs. by s. 92 and the Second Schedule, ibid., for “record” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “any Government in British India”.
4. Ins. by the A. O. 1950.
5. The original words were “Act of the Governor General of India in Council or of the Governors in Council of
Madras or Bombay, or of the Lieutenant Governor in Council of Bengal, or in a notification of the Government
appearing in the Gazette of India, or in the Gazette of any L.G., or in any printed paper purporting to be the
London Gazette or the Government Gazette of any colony or possession of the Queen, is a relevant fact”. This
was amended first by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (10 of 1914), and then by the A.O. 1937, the A.O.
1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “an Act of the Legislature of a Part A State or a Part C State”.
7. The “last paragraph” omitted by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.
8. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule, for “s. 39” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
forms part of a longer statement, or of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is contained in a
document which forms part of a book, or is contained in part of electronic record or of a connected series
of letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more of the statement, conversation,
document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers as the Court considers necessary in that
particular case to the full understanding of the nature and effect of the statement, and of the circumstances
under which it was made.]
JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE WHEN RELEVANT
40. Previous judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.––The existence of any judgment,
order or decree which by law prevents any Court from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a
relevant fact when the question is whether such Court ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold
such trial.
41. Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc., jurisdiction.––A final judgment, order or
decree of a competent Court, in the exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction,
which confers upon or takes away from any person any legal character, or which declares any person to
be entitled to any such character, or to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any specified person
but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal character, or the title of any such person to
any such thing, is relevant.
Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof ––
that any legal character which it confers accrued at the time when such judgment, order or decree
came into operation;
that any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be entitled, accrued to that person at
the time when such judgment 1[order or decree] declares it to have accrued to that person;
that any legal character which it takes away from any such person ceased at the time from which such
judgment, 1[order or decree] declared that it had ceased or should cease;
and that anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled was the property of that person at
the time from which such judgment, 1[order or decree] declares that it had been or should be his property.
42. Relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in
section 41. –– Judgments, orders or decrees other than those mentioned in section 41 are relevant if they
relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry; but such judgments, orders or decrees are not
conclusive proof of that which they state.
Illustration
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the existence of a public right of way over the land, which A denies.
The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit by A against C for a trespass on the same land, in
which C alleged the existence of the same right of way, is relevant, but it is not conclusive proof that the right of
way exists.
43. Judgments, etc., other than those mentioned in sections 40, 41 and 42, when relevant.––
Judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in sections 40, 41 and 42, are irrelevant, unless
the existence of such judgment, order or decree is a fact in issue, or is relevant under some other provision
of this Act.
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 3.
Illustrations
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects upon each of them. C in each case says that the
matter alleged to be libellous is true, and the circumstances are such that it is probably true in each case,
or in neither.
A obtains a decree against C for damages on the ground that C failed to make out his justification.
The fact is irrelevant as between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for adultery with C, A’s wife.
B denies that C is A’s wife, but the Court convicts B of adultery.
Afterwards, C is prosecuted for bigamy in marrying B during A’s lifetime.
C says that she never was A’s wife.
The judgment against B is irrelevant as against C.
(c) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is convicted.
A afterwards sues C for the cow, which B had sold to him before his conviction. As between A and
C, the judgment against B is irrelevant.
(d) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land against B. C, B’s son, murders A in
consequence.
The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for a crime.
1[(e) A is charged with theft and with having been previously convicted of theft. The previous
conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(f) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B prosecuted A for libel and that A was convicted and
sentenced is relevant under section 8 as showing the motive for the fact in issue.]
44. Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or incompetency of Court, may be
proved.––Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or decree which is
relevant under section 40, 41 or 42, and which has been proved by the adverse party, was delivered by a
Court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by fraud or collusion.
OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS WHEN RELEVANT
45. Opinions of experts.––When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law or of
science, or art, or as to identity of handwriting 2[or finger impressions], the opinions upon that point of
persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, 3[or in questions as to identity of handwriting]
2[or finger impressions] are relevant facts.
Such persons are called experts.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by poison.
The opinions of experts as to the symptoms produced by the poison by which A is supposed to have
died, are relevant.
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 5.
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 1899, s. 3 for discussion in Council as to whether “finger impressions” include “thumb
impressions” see Gazette of India, 1898, pt.VI, p. 24.
3. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 4.
(b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain act, was, by reason of unsoundness of
mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he was doing what was either wrong or contrary
to law.
The opinions of experts upon the question whether the symptoms exhibited by A commonly show
unsoundness of mind, and whether such unsoundness of mind usually renders persons incapable of
knowing the nature of the acts which they do, or of knowing that what they do is either wrong or contrary
to law, are relevant.
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was written by A. Another document is produced
which is proved or admitted to have been written by A.
The opinions of experts on the question whether the two documents were written by the same person
or by different persons, are relevant.
1[45A. Opinion of Examiner of Electronic Evidence.—When in a proceeding, the court has to form
an opinion on any matter relating to any information transmitted or stored in any computer resource or
any other electronic or digital form, the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in
section 79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), is a relevant fact.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, an Examiner of Electronic Evidence shall be an
expert.]
46. Facts bearing upon opinions of experts.––Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they
support or are inconsistent with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison.
The fact that other persons, who were poisoned by that poison, exhibited certain symptoms which
experts affirm or deny to be the symptoms of that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain sea-wall.
The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there were no such
sea-walls, began to be obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
47. Opinion as to hand-writing, when relevant.––When the Court has to form an opinion as to the
person by whom any document was written or signed, the opinion of any person acquainted with the
handwriting of the person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was or was not written or
signed by that person, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.––A person is said to be acquainted with the hand-writing of another person when he has
seen that person write, or when he has received documents purporting to be written by that person in
answer to documents written by himself or under his authority and addressed to that person, or when, in
the ordinary course of business, documents purporting to be written by that person have been habitually
submitted to him.
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
Illustration
The question is, whether a given letter is in the hand-writing of A, a merchant in London.
B is a merchant in Calcutta, who has written letters addressed to A and received letters purporting to
be written by him. C, is B’s clerk whose duty it was to examine and file B’s correspondence. D is B’s
broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting to be written by A for the purpose of
advising with him thereon.
The opinions of B, C and D on the question whether the letter is in the handwriting of A are relevant,
though neither B, C nor D ever saw A write.
1[47A. Opinion as to digital signature, when relevant.––When the Court has to form an opinion as
to the 2[electronic signature of any person, the opinion of the Certifying Authority which has issued the
3[electronic Signature Certificate] is a relevant fact.]
48. Opinion as to existence of right or custom, when relevant.––When the Court has to form an
opinion as to the existence of any general custom or right, the opinions, as to the existence of such custom
or right, of persons who would be likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
Explanation.––The expression “general custom or right” includes customs or rights common to any
considerable class of persons.
Illustration
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is a general right
within the meaning of this section.
49. Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when relevant. –– When the Court has to form an opinion as
to––
the usages and tenets of any body of men or family,
the constitution and government of any religious or charitable foundation, or
the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by particular classes of people,
the opinions of persons having special means of knowledge thereon are, relevant facts.
50. Opinion on relationship, when relevant. ––When the Court has to form an opinion as to the
relationship of one person to another, the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such
relationship, of any person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of knowledge
on the subject, is a relevant fact:
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings under the Indian
Divorce Act, 1869 (4 of 1869), or in prosecutions under section 494, 495, 497 or 498 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860).
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A and B, were married.
The fact that they were usually received and treated by their friends as husband and wife, is relevant.
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Subs. by s 52, ibid., for “Digital Signature Certificate” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
(b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of B. The fact that A was always treated as
such by members of the family, is relevant.
51. Grounds of opinion, when relevant.––Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant, the
grounds on which such opinion is based are also relevant.
Illustration
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for the purpose of forming his opinion.
CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
52. In civil cases character to prove conduct imputed, irrelevant.––In civil cases, the fact that the
character of any person concerned is such as to render probable or improbable any conduct imputed to
him, is irrelevant, except in so far as such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.
53. In criminal cases previous good character relevant.––In criminal proceedings, the fact that the
person accused is of a good character, is relevant.
1[53A. Evidence of character or previous sexual experience not relevant in certain cases.–– In a
prosecution for an offence under section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D,
section 376, 2[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA,
section 376DB] or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or for attempt to commit any such
offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of the victim or of such
person’s previous sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant on the issue of such consent or
the quality of consent.]
3[54. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.–– In criminal proceedings, the fact that
the accused person has a bad character, is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he has a good
character, in which case it becomes relevant.
Explanation 1.––This section does not apply to cases in which the bad character of any person is itself
a fact in issue.
Explanation 2. ––A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.]
55. Character as affecting damages. ––In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person is
such as to affect the amount of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.
Explanation. ––In sections 52, 53, 54 and 55, the word “character” includes both reputation and
disposition; but, 4[except as provided in section 54], evidence may be given only of general reputation and
general disposition, and not of particular acts by which reputation or disposition were shown.
PART II
ON PROOF
CHAPTER III.––FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
56. Fact judicially noticeable need not be proved.––No fact of which the Court will take judicial
notice need be proved.
57. Facts of which Court must take judicial notice.––The Court shall take judicial notice of the
following facts: ––
5[(1) All laws in force in the territory of India;]
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 25 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013)
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 8, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 6 for “section 54”.
4. Ins. by s. 7, ibid.
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “the clause (1)”.
(2) All public Acts passed or hereafter to be passed by Parliament 1[of the United Kingdom], and
all local and personal Acts directed by Parliament 1[of the United Kingdom] to be judicially noticed;
(3) Articles of War for 2[the Indian] Army 3[Navy or Air Force]
4[(4) The course of proceeding of Parliament of the United Kingdom, of the Constituent
Assembly of India, of Parliament and of the legislatures established under any laws for the time being
in force in a Province or in the States]
(5) The accession and the sign manual of the Sovereign for the time being of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland;
(6) All seals of which English Courts take judicial notice: the seals of all the 5[Courts in 6[India]]
and of all Courts out of 6[India] established by the authority of 7[the Central Government or the
Crown Representative]; the seals of Courts of Admiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction and of Notaries
Public, and all seals which any person is authorised to use by 8[the Constitution or an Act of
Parliament of the United Kingdom or an] Act or Regulation having the force of law in 6[India];
(7) The accession to office, names, titles, functions, and signatures of the persons filling for the
time being any public office in any State, if the fact of their appointment to such office is notified in
9[any Official Gazette];
(8) The existence, title and national flag of every State or Sovereign recognised by 10[the
Government of India];
(9) The divisions of time, the geographical divisions of the world, and public festivals, fasts and
holidays notified in the Official Gazette;
(10) The territories under the dominion of 10[the Government of India];
(11) The commencement, continuance and termination of hostilities between 10[the Government
of India] and any other State or body of persons;
(12) The names of the members and officers of the Court, and of their deputies and subordinate
officers and assistants, and also of all officers acting in execution of its process, and of all advocates,
attorneys, proctors, vakils, pleaders and other persons authorised by law to appear or act before it;
(13) The rule of the road 11[on land or at sea].
In all these cases and also on all matters of public history, literature, science or art, the Court may
resort for its aid to appropriate books or documents of reference.
If the Court is called upon by any person to take judicial notice of any fact, it may refuse to do so
unless and until such person produces any such book or document as it may consider necessary to enable
it to do so.
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the clause (2)”.
2. Subs. ibid., for “her Majesty’s”.
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule, for “or Navy”.
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the Former para. (4).
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “Courts of British India”.
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “the States”.
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the G.G. or any L.G. in Council”.
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “any Act of Parliament or other”.
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the Gazette of India or in the Official Gazette of any L.G.”.
10. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the British Crown”.
11. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 5.
58. Facts admitted need not be proved.––No fact need be proved in any proceeding which the
parties thereto or their agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to
admit by any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are
deemed to have admitted by their pleadings:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved otherwise than
by such admissions.
CHAPTER IV.–– OF ORAL EVIDENCE
59. Proof of facts by oral evidence. –– All facts, except the 1[contents of documents or electronic
records], may be proved by oral evidence.
60. Oral evidence must be direct. –– Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever, be direct; that is to
say ––
if it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he saw it;
if it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he heard
it;
if it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it must
be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner;
if it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the evidence of
the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for sale, and the
grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production of such treatises if the
author is dead or cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving evidence, or cannot be called as
a witness without an amount of delay or expense which the Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided also that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any material thing other
than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of such material thing for its
inspection.
CHAPTER V. –– OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
61. Proof of contents of documents. –– The contents of documents may be proved either by primary
or by secondary evidence.
62. Primary evidence. –– Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of
the Court.
Explanation 1. ––Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary evidence of the
document.
Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart being executed by one or some of the
parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as against the parties executing it.
Explanation 2. –– Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process, as in the case
of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of the contents of the rest; but, where
they are all copies of a common original, they are not primary evidence of the contents of the original.
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule, for “Contents of documents” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
Illustration
A person is shown to have been in possession of a number of placards, all printed at one time from
one original. Any one of the placards is primary evidence of the contents of any other, but no one of them
is primary evidence of the contents of the original.
63. Secondary evidence. –– Secondary evidence means and includes ––
(1) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained;
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves insure the
accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
(3) copies made from or compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen it.
Illustrations
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents, though the two have not been
compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A copy compared with a copy of a letter made by a copying machine is secondary evidence of the
contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying machine was made from the
original.
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with the original, is secondary
evidence; but the copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of the original, although the copy from
which it was transcribed was compared with the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original, nor an oral account of a photograph
or machine-copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.
64. Proof of documents by primary evidence.––Documents must be proved by primary evidence
except in the cases hereinafter mentioned.
65. Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given.––Secondary
evidence may be given of the existence, condition, or contents of a document in the following cases: ––
(a) when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power ––
of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved, or
of any person out of reach of, or not subject to, the process of the Court, or
of any person legally bound to produce it,
and when, after the notice mentioned in section 66, such person does not produce it;
(b) when the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved to be admitted in
writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his representative in interest;
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering evidence of its
contents cannot, for any other reason not arising from his own default or neglect, produce it in
reasonable time;
(d) when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable;
(e) when the original is a public document within the meaning of section 74;
(f) when the original is a document of which a certified copy is permitted by this Act, or by any
other law in force in 1[India] to be given in evidence;
(g) when the originals consist of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot
conveniently be examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general result of the whole
collection.
In cases (a), (c) and (d), any secondary evidence of the contents of the document is admissible.
In case (b), the written admission is admissible.
In case (e) or (f), a certified copy of the document, but no other kind of secondary evidence, is
admissible.
In case (g), evidence may be given as to the general result of the documents by any person who
has examined them, and who is skilled in the examination of such documents.
2[65A. Special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic record. ––The contents of electronic
records may be proved in accordance with the provisions of section 65B.
65B. Admissibility of electronic records. –– (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
any information contained in an electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied
in optical or magnetic media produced by a computer (hereinafter referred to as the computer output)
shall be deemed to be also a document, if the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation
to the information and computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further
proof or production of the original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein
of which direct evidence would be admissible.
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of a computer output shall be the
following, namely: ––
(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the computer during the
period over which the computer was used regularly to store or process information for the
purposes of any activities regularly carried on over that period by the person having lawful
control over the use of the computer;
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic record or of the
kind from which the information so contained is derived was regularly fed into the computer in
the ordinary course of the said activities;
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was operating properly or, if
not, then in respect of any period in which it was not operating properly or was out of operation
during that part of the period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the accuracy of its
contents; and
(d) the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is derived from such
information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities.
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing information for the purposes of
any activities regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) was
regularly performed by computers, whether––
(a) by a combination of computers operating over that period; or
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “the States”.
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
(b) by different computers operating in succession over that period; or
(c) by different combinations of computers operating in succession over that period; or
(d) in any other manner involving the successive operation over that period, in whatever
order, of one or more computers and one or more combinations of computers,
all the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be treated for the purposes of this
section as constituting a single computer; and references in this section to a computer shall be
construed accordingly.
(4) In any proceedings where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of this section,
a certificate doing any of the following things, that is to say, ––
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing the manner in
which it was produced;
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that electronic record
as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the electronic record was produced by a
computer;
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in sub-section (2)
relate,
and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a responsible official position in relation to the
operation of the relevant device or the management of the relevant activities (whichever is
appropriate) shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the purposes of this sub-
section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the
person stating it.
(5) For the purposes of this section, ––
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer if it is supplied thereto in any
appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or (with or without human intervention) by
means of any appropriate equipment;
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any official, information is supplied with
a view to its being stored or processed for the purposes of those activities by a computer operated
otherwise than in the course of those activities, that information, if duly supplied to that
computer, shall be taken to be supplied to it in the course of those activities;
(c) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer whether it was
produced by it directly or (with or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate
equipment.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section any reference to information being derived from other
information shall be a reference to its being derived therefrom by calculation, comparison or any other
process.]
66. Rules as to notice to produce.— Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents referred
to in section 65, clause (a), shall not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary evidence
has previously given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, 1[or to his attorney or
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 6.
pleader,] such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no notice is prescribed by law, then such
notice as the Court considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case:
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence admissible in
any of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court thinks fit to dispense with it: ––
(1) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;
(2) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will be required to
produce it;
(3) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession of the original by
fraud or force;
(4) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court;
(5) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document;
(6) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not subject to, the process
of the Court.
67. Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or written document
produced. –– If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part by any
person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be in that person’s
handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.
1[67A. Proof as to 2[electronic signature].––Except in the case of a secure 2[electronic signature], if the
2[electronic signature] of any subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record the fact that
such 2[electronic signature] is the 2[electronic signature] of the subscriber must be proved.]
68. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested.––If a document is required by
law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for
the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of
the Court and capable of giving evidence:
3[Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the execution of any
document, not being a will, which has been registered in accordance with the provisions of the Indian
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), unless its execution by the person by whom it purports to have been
executed is specifically denied.]
69. Proof where no attesting witness found.––If no such attesting witness can be found, or if the
document purports to have been executed in the United Kingdom, it must be proved that the attestation of
one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person executing the
document is in the hand writing of that person.
70. Admission of execution by party to attested document.––The admission of a party to an
attested document of its execution by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against him,
though it be a document required by law to be attested.
71. Proof when attesting witness denies the execution.––If the attesting witness denies or does not
recollect the execution of the document, its execution may be proved by other evidence.
72. Proof of document not required by law to be attested.––An attested document not required by
law to be attested may be proved as if it was unattested.
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Ins. by Act 31 of 1926, s. 2.
73. Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved.––In order to
ascertain whether a signature, writing, or seal is that of the person by whom it purports to have been
written or made, any signature, writing, or seal admitted or proved to the satisfaction of the Court to have
been written or made by that person may be compared with the one which is to be proved, although that
signature, writing, or seal has not been produced or proved for any other purpose.
The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or figures for the purpose of
enabling the Court to compare the words or figures so written with any words or figures alleged to have
been written by such person.
1[This section applies also, with any necessary modifications, to finger-impressions.]
2[73A. Proof as to verification of digital signature.––In order to ascertain whether a digital
signature is that of the person by whom it purports to have been affixed, the Court may direct ––
(a) that person or the Controller or the Certifying Authority to produce the Digital Signature
Certificate;
(b) any other person to apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate and
verify the digital signature purported to have been affixed by that person.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, “Controller” means the Controller appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).]
PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
74. Public documents.––The following documents are public documents: ––
(1) Documents forming the acts, or records of the acts ––
(i) of the sovereign authority,
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals, and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive, 3[of any part of India or of the
Commonwealth], or of a foreign country;
(2) Public records kept 4[in any State] of private documents.
75. Private documents.––All other documents are private.
76. Certified copies of public documents.––Every public officer having the custody of a public
document, which any person has a right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on
payment of the legal fees there for, together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a
true copy of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated and
subscribed by such officer with his name and his official title, and shall be sealed, whenever such officer
is authorized by law to make use of a seal; and such copies so certified shall be called certified copies.
Explanation.––Any officer who, by the ordinary course of official duty, is authorized to deliver such
copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such documents within the meaning of this section.
77. Proof of documents by production of certified copies.––Such certified copies may be produced
in proof of the contents of the public documents or parts of the public documents of which they purport to
be copies.
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1899, s. 3.
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
3. The original words “whether of British India, or of any other part of Her Majesty’s Dominios” have successively
been amended by the A.O. 1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “in any Province”.
78. Proof of other official documents.–– The following public documents may be proved as
follows:––
(1) Acts, orders or notifications of 1[the Central Government] in any of its departments, 2[or of the
Crown Representative] or of any State Government or any department of any State Government, ––
by the records of the departments, certified by the head of those departments respectively,
or by any document purporting to be printed by order of any such Government 3[or, as the
case may be, of the Crown Representative];
(2) the proceedings of the Legislatures,––
by the journals of those bodies respectively, or by published Acts or abstracts, or by copies
purporting to be printed 3[by order of the Government concerned];
(3) proclamations, orders or regulations issued by 4[Her Majesty] or by the Privy Council, or by
any department of  4[Her Majesty’s Government,––
by copies or extracts contained in the London Gazette, or purporting to be printed by the
Queen’s Printer;
(4) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign country, ––
by journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country as such, or by
a copy certified under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a recognition thereof in some
5[Central Act]:
(5) the proceedings of a municipal body in 6[a State], ––
by a copy of such proceedings, certified by the legal keeper thereof, or by a printed book
purporting to be published by the authority of such body;
(6) public documents of any other class in a foreign country, ––
by the original, or by a copy certified by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the
seal of a Notary Public, or of 7[an Indian Consul] or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly
certified by the officer having the legal custody of the original, and upon proof of the character of
the document according to the law of the foreign country.
PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
79. Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies. –– The Court shall presume 8[to be genuine]
every document purporting to be a certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by Law declared
to be admissible as evidence of any particular fact, and which purports to be duly certified by any officer
9[of the Central Government or of a State Government, or by any officer 10[in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir] who is duly authorized thereto by the Central Government]:
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the Executive Government of British India”.
2. Ins. ibid.
3. Subs. ibid., for “by order of Government.”.
4. The words “her Majesty” shall stand unmodified, vide the A.O. 1950.
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “public Act of the Governor General of India in Council”.
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “a Province”.
7. Subs. by ibid., for “a British Consul”.
8. Ins. by the A.O. 1948.
9. The original words beginning from “in British India” and ending with the words “to be genuine” have been
successively amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.
10. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “in a Part B State”.
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and purports to be executed in the manner
directed by law in that behalf.
The Court shall also presume that any officer by whom any such document purports to be signed or
certified, held, when he signed it, the official character which he claims in such paper.
80. Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence.––Whenever any document is
produced before any Court, purporting to be a record or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of
the evidence, given by a witness in a judicial proceeding or before any officer authorized by law to take
such evidence or to be a statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance
with law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid, the
Court shall presume––
that the document is genuine; that any statements as to the circumstances under which it was
taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it, are true, and that such evidence, statement or
confession was duly taken.
81. Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, private Acts of Parliament and other
documents. –– The Court shall presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be the London
Gazette or 1[any Official Gazette, or the Government Gazette] of any colony, dependency or possession
of the British Crown, or to be a newspaper or journal, or to be a copy of a private Act of Parliament 2[of
the United Kingdom] printed by the Queen’s Printer, and of every document purporting to be a document
directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such document is kept substantially in the form required
by law and is produced from proper custody.
3[81A. Presumption as to Gazettes in electronic forms.––The Court shall presume the genuineness
of every electronic record purporting to be the Official Gazette, or purporting to be electronic record
directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such electronic record is kept substantially in the form
required by law and is produced from proper custody.]
82. Presumption as to document admissible in England without proof of seal or signature. ––
When any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a document which, by the law in
force for the time being in England or Ireland, would be admissible in proof of any particular in any Court
of Justice in England or Ireland, without proof of the seal or stamp or signature authenticating it, or of the
judicial or official character claimed by the person by whom it purports to be signed, the Court shall
presume that such seal, stamp or signature is genuine, and that the person signing it held, at the time when
he signed it, the judicial or official character which he claims,
and the document shall be admissible for the same purpose for which it would be admissible in
England or Ireland.
83. Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of Government.––The Court shall
presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority of 4[the Central Government or any
State Government] were so made, and are accurate; but maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause
must be proved to be accurate.
84. Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of decisions. –– The Court shall presume the
genuineness of every book purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the Government of
any country, and to contain any of the laws of that country,
and of every book purporting to contain reports of decisions of the Courts of such country.
1. Subs by the A.O. 1937, for “the Gazette of India, or the Government Gazette of any L.G., or”.
2. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92, and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
4. The original word “Government” has successively been amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948, Act 40 of
1949 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.
85. Presumption as to powers-of-attorney. –– The Court shall presume that every document
purporting to be a power-of-attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary
Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, 1[Indian] Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative 2*** of the
3[Central Government], was so executed and authenticated.
4[85A. Presumption as to electronic agreements. –– The Court shall presume that every electronic
record purporting to be an agreement containing the 5[electronic signature] of the parties was so
concluded by affixing the 5[electronic signature] of the parties.
85B. Presumption as to electronic records and 5[electronic signatures]. –– (1) In any proceedings
involving a secure electronic record, the Court shall presume unless contrary is proved, that the secure
electronic record has not been altered since the specific point of time to which the secure status relates.
(2) In any proceedings, involving secure digital signature, the Court shall presume unless the contrary
is proved that—
(a) the secure 5[electronic signature] is affixed by subscriber with the intention of signing or
approving the electronic record;
(b) except in the case of a secure electronic record or a secure 5[electronic signature], nothing in
this section shall cerate any presumption, relating to authenticity and integrity of the electronic record
or any 5[electronic signature].
85C. Presumption as to 6[Electronic Signature Certificates]. –– The Court shall presume, unless
contrary is proved, that the information listed in a  6[Electronic Signature Certificate] is correct, except for
information specified as subscriber information which has not been verified, if the certificate was
accepted by the subscriber.]
86. Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records.  The Court may presume that
any document purporting to be a certified copy of any judicial record of 7[8* * * any country not forming
part of India or] of Her Majesty’s Dominions is genuine and accurate, if the document purports to be
certified in any manner which is certified by any representative of 9* * * the 3[Central Government] 10[in
or for] 11[such country] to be the manner commonly in use in 12[that country] for the certification of
copies of judicial records.
13[An officer who, with respect to 14*** any territory or place not forming part of 15[India or] Her
Majesty’s Dominions, is a Political Agent there for, as defined in section 3, 16[clause (43)], of the General
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “British”.
2. The Words “of Her Majesty, or” Rep. ibid.
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Government of India”.
4. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92, and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52(e), for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
6. Subs. by ibid., s. 52(f), for “Digital Signature Certificate” (w.e.f. 27.10.2009).
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “any country not forming part”.
8. The words “a Part B State or of” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.
9. The words “Her Majesty or of” omitted by A.O. 1950.
10. Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 8, for “resident in”.
11. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “such Part B State or Country”.
12. Subs. by s. 3 and the Schedule, ibid., for “that State or Country”.
13.  Subs. by Act 5 of 1899, s. 4, for the para added by Act 3 of 1891, s. 3.
14. The words “a Part B State or” ins. by the A.O. 1950, omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.
15. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.
16. Subs., ibid., for “clause (40)”.
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be a representative of
the 1[Central Government] 2[in and for the country] comprising that territory or place].
87. Presumption as to books, maps and charts. –– The Court may presume that any book to which
it may refer for information on matters of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart,
the statements of which are relevant facts, and which is produced for its inspection, was written and
published by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have been written
or published.
88. Presumption as to telegraphic messages. –– The Court may presume that a message, forwarded
from a telegraph office to the person to whom such message purports to be addressed, corresponds with a
message delivered for transmission at the office from which the message purports to be sent; but the
Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was delivered for
transmission.
3[88A. Presumption as to electronic messages. –– The Court may presume that an electronic
message, forwarded by the originator through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the
message purports to be addressed corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for transmission;
but the Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was sent.
Explanation. ––  For the purposes of this section, the expressions “addressee” and “originator” shall
have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (b) and (za) of sub-section (1) of
section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).]
89. Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced. ––The Court shall presume
that every document, called for and not produced after notice to produce, was attested, stamped and
executed in the manner required by law.
90. Presumption as to documents thirty years old. –– Where any document, purporting or proved
to be thirty years old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers
proper, the Court may presume that the signature and every other part of such document, which purports
to be in the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person’s handwriting, and, in the case of a
document executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by whom it purports
to be executed and attested.
Explanation.–– Documents are said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in which, and
under the care of the person with whom, they would naturally be; but no custody is improper if it is
proved to have had a legitimate origin, or if the circumstances of the particular case are such as to render
such an origin probable.
This explanation applies also to section 81.
Illustrations
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for a long time. He produces from his custody deeds relating to
the land showing his titles to it. The custody is proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is the mortgagee. The mortgagor is in possession.
The custody is proper.
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “G. of I.”
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “in and for that Part B State or country”.
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B’s possession, which were deposited
with him by B for safe custody. The custody is proper.
1[90A. Presumption as to electronic records five years old. –– Where any electronic record,
purporting or proved to be five years old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular
case considers proper, the Court may presume that the 2[electronic signature] which purports to be the
2[electronic signature] of any particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorised by him in
this behalf.
Explanation. –– Electronic records are said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in which,
and under the care of the person with whom, they naturally be; but no custody is improper if it is proved
to have had a legitimate origin, or the circumstances of the particular case are such as to render such an
origin probable.
This Explanation applies also to section 81A.]
CHAPTER VI. –– OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
91. Evidence of terms of contracts, grants and other dispositions of property reduced to form of
document. –– When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property, have
been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is required by law to be
reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof of the terms of such contract,
grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter, except the document itself, or secondary
evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary evidence is admissible under the provisions
hereinbefore contained.
Exception 1.––When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and when it is
shown that any particular person has acted as such officer, the writing by which he is appointed need not
be proved.
Exception 2.–– Wills 3[admitted to probate in 4[India]] may be proved by the probate.
Explanation 1.––This section applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants or dispositions of
property referred to are contained in one document, and to cases in which they are contained in more
documents than one.
Explanation 2.–– Where there are more originals than one, one original only need be proved.
Explanation 3. –– The statement, in any document whatever, of a fact other than the facts referred to
in this section, shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the same fact.
Illustrations
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained must be proved.
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of exchange must be proved.
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved.
(d) A contracts, in writing, with B, for the delivery of indigo upon certain terms. The contract mentions the fact
that B had paid A the price of other indigo contracted for verbally on another occasion.
1.  Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52, for “Digital Signature” (w.e.f. 27.10.2009).
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 7, for “under the Indian Succession Act”.
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “the States”.
Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made for the other indigo. The evidence is
admissible.
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B.
Oral evidence is offered of the payment.
The evidence is admissible.
92. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement. –– When the terms of any such contract, grant or other
disposition of property, or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have been
proved according to the last section, no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted, as
between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest, for the purpose of
contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, its terms:
Proviso (1). –– Any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, or which would
entitle any person to any decree or order relating thereto; such as fraud, intimidation, illegality, want of
due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party, 1[want or failure] of consideration, or mistake in
fact or law.
Proviso (2). ––The existence of any separate oral agreement as to any matter on which a document is
silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms, may be proved. In considering whether or not this
proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the degree of formality of the document.
Proviso (3). ––The existence of any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition precedent to the
attaching of any obligation under any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved.
Proviso (4). ––The existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind or modify any such
contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved, except in cases in which such contract, grant or
disposition of property is by law required to be in writing, or has been registered according to the law in
force for the time being as to the registration of documents.
Proviso (5). –– Any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned in any contract are
usually annexed to contracts of that description, may be proved:
Provided that the annexing of such incident would not be repugnant to, or inconsistent with, the
express terms of the contract.
Proviso (6). –– Any fact may be proved which shows in what manner the language of a document is
related to existing facts.
Illustrations
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods “in ships from Calcutta to London”. The goods are shipped in a
particular ship which is lost. The fact that particular ship was orally excepted from the policy, cannot be proved.
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B Rs. 1,000 on the first March 1873. The fact that, at the same time, an
oral agreement was made that the money should not be paid till the thirty-first March, cannot be proved.
(c) An estate called “the Rampore tea estate” is sold by a deed which contains a map of the property sold. The
fact that land not included in the map had always been regarded as part of the estate and was meant to pass by the
deed cannot be proved.
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 8, for “want of failure”.
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work certain mines, the property of B, upon certain
terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentation of B’s as to their value. This fact may be proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific performance of a contract, and also prays that the
contract may be reformed as to one of its provisions, as that provision was inserted in it by mistake. A
may prove that such a mistake was made as would by law entitle him to have the contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as to the time of payment, and accepts the
goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may show that the goods were supplied on credit for a term
still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B a paper in these words: “Bought of
A a horse of Rs. 500”. B may prove the verbal warranty.
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and gives B a card on which is written ––“Rooms, Rs. 200 a month.” A
may prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to include partial board.
A hires lodgings of B for a year, and a regularly stamped agreement, drawn up by an attorney, is
made between them. It is silent on the subject of board. A may not prove that board was included in the
term verbally.
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for the money. B keeps the receipt and does
not send the money. In a suit for the amount, A may prove this.
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the happening of a certain contingency.
The writing is left with B, who sues A upon it. A may show the circumstances under which it was
delivered.
93. Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous document. –– When the language used
in a document is, on its face, ambiguous or defective, evidence may not be given of facts which would
show its meaning or supply its defects.
Illustrations
(a) A agrees, in writing, to sell a horse to B for “Rs. 1,000 or Rs. 1,500”. Evidence cannot be given to
show which price was to be given.
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be given of facts which would show how they were
meant to be filled.
94. Exclusion of evidence against application of document to existing facts. –– When language
used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applies accurately to existing facts, evidence may not be
given to show that it was not meant to apply to such facts.
Illustration
A sells to B, by deed, “my estate at Rampur containing 100 bighas”. A has an estate at Rampur containing
100 bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact that the estate meant to be sold was one situated at a different
place and of a different size.
95. Evidence as to document unmeaning reference to existing facts. –– When language used in a
document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference to existing facts, evidence may be given to show
that it was used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration
A sells to B, by deed, “my house in Calcutta”.
A had no house in Calcutta, but it appears that he had a house at Howrah, of which B had been in possession
since the execution of the deed.
These facts may be proved to show that the deed related to the house at Howrah.
96. Evidence as to application of language which can apply to one only of several
persons. –– When the facts are such that the language used might have been meant to apply to any one,
and could not have been meant to apply to more than one, of several persons or things, evidence may be
given of facts which show which of those persons or things it was intended to apply to.
Illustrations
(a) A agrees to sell to B, for Rs. 1,000, “my white horse”. A has two white horses. Evidence may be give of
facts which show which of them was meant.
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Haidarabad. Evidence may be given of facts showing whether Haidarabad in
the Dekkhan or Haiderabad in Sind was meant.
97. Evidence as to application of language to one of two sets of facts, to neither of which the
whole correctly applies. –– When the language used applies partly to one set of existing facts, and partly
to another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence may be
given to show to which of the two it was meant to apply.
Illustration
A agrees to sell to B “my land at X in the occupation of Y”. A has land at X, but not in the occupation of Y, and
he has land in the occupation of Y but it is not at X. Evidence may be given of facts showing which he meant to sell.
98. Evidence as to meaning of illegible characters, etc. –– Evidence may be given to show the
meaning of illegible or not commonly intelligible characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical, local and
provincial expressions, of abbreviations and of words used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration
A, sculptor, agrees to sell to B, “all my mods”. A has both models and modelling tools. Evidence may be given
to show which he meant to sell.
99. Who may give evidence of agreement varying terms of document.––Persons who are not
parties to a document, or their representatives in interest, may give evidence of any facts tending to show
a contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of the document.
Illustration
A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sell A certain cotton, to be paid for on delivery. At the same
time they make an oral agreement that three months credit shall be given to A. This could not be shown as between
A and B, but it might be shown by C, if it affected his interests.
100. Saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating to wills.––Nothing in this Chapter
contained shall be taken to affect any of the provisions of the Indian Succession Act,
1865 1(10 of 1865) as to the construction of wills.
PART III
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII. –– OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
101. Burden of proof. –– Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or
liability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist. When a
person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person.
Illustrations
(a) A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished for a crime which A says B has committed. A
must prove that B has committed the crime.
1. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), Pt. VI, Ch. VI.
(b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to certain land in the possession of B, by
reason of facts which he asserts, and which B denies, to be true. A must prove the existence of those facts.
102. On whom burden of proof lies. –– The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that
person who would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and which, as A asserts, was left to A by the will of C, B’s
father.
If no evidence were given on either side, B would be entitled to retain his possession.
Therefore the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond.
The execution of the bond is admitted, but B says that it was obtained by fraud, which A denies.
If no evidence were given on either side, A would succeed, as the bond is not disputed and the fraud is not
proved.
Therefore the burden of proof is on B.
103. Burden of proof as to particular fact. ––The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on
that person who wishes the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof
of that fact shall lie on any particular person.
Illustrations
1[(a)] A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court to believe that B admitted the theft to C. A must prove the
admission.
(b) B wishes the Court to believe that, at the time in question, he was elsewhere. He must prove it.
104. Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible. –– The burden of proving
any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on the
person who wishes to give such evidence.
Illustrations
(a) A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A must prove B’s death.
(b) A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the contents of a lost document.
A must prove that the document has been lost.
105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions. ––When a person is
accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any
of the General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or within any special exception or
proviso contained in any other part of the same Code, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and
the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances.
Illustrations
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not know the nature of the act.
The burden of proof is on A.
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was deprived of the
power of self-control.
1. See, in the Act as published in Gazette of India, 1872, Pt. IV, p. 1 there is no illustration (b).
The burden of proof is on A.
(c) Section 325 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) provides that whoever, except in the case
provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall be subject to certain punishments.
A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt under section 325.
The burden of proving the circumstances bringing the case under section 335 lies on A.
106. Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge. –– When any fact is especially within
the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.
Illustrations
(a) When a person does an act with some intention other than that which the character and
circumstances of the act suggest, the burden of proving that intention is upon him.
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket. The burden of proving that he had a
ticket is on him.
107. Burden of proving death of person known to have been alive within thirty years. –– When
the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he was alive within thirty years, the
burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms it.
108. Burden of proving that person is alive who has not been heard of for seven
years. –– 1[Provided that when] the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has
not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had been alive,
the burden of proving that he is alive is 2[shifted to] the person who affirms it.
109. Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord and tenant, principal
and agent. –– When the question is whether persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or principal and
agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden of proving that they do not
stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those relationships respectively, is on the person who
affirms it.
110. Burden of proof as to ownership.––When the question is whether any person is owner of
anything of which he is shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the
person who affirms that he is not the owner.
111. Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of active confidence. ––
Where there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties, one of whom stands to the
other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the
party who is in a position of active confidence.
Illustrations
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an attorney is in question in a suit brought by the client.
The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the attorney.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit brought by
the son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father.
3[111A. Presumption as to certain offences. –– (1) Where a person is accused of having committed
any offence specified in sub-section (2), in ––
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 9, for “when”.
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “on”.
3. Ins. by Act 61 of 1984, s. 20 (w.e.f. 14-7-1984).
(a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under any enactment, for the time being in force,
making provision for the suppression of disorder and restoration and maintenance of public order; or
(b) any area in which there has been, over a period of more than one month, extensive disturbance
of the public peace,
and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a time when firearms or explosives
were used at or from that place to attack or resist the members of any armed forces or the forces charged
with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of their duties, it shall be presumed, unless
the contrary is shown, that such person had committed such offence.
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, namely: ––
(a) an offence under section 121, section 121A, section 122 or section 123 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860);
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence under section 122 or
section 123 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]
112. Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy. –– The fact that any person was born
during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and
eighty days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the
legitimate son of that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each
other at any time when he could have been begotten.
113. Proof of cession of territory. –– A notification in the Gazette of India that any portion of
British territory has
1[before the commencement of Part III of the Government of India
Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5, c. 2)] been ceded to any Native State, Prince or Ruler, shall be conclusive proof
that a valid cession of such territory took place at the date mentioned in such notification.
2[113A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman. ––When the question is
whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her
husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of
her marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the court
may presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted
by her husband or by such relative of her husband.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, “cruelty” shall have the same meaning as in
section 498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]
3[113B. Presumption as to dowry death. ––-When the question is whether a person has committed
the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected
by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall
presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, “dowry death” shall have the same meaning as in
section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]
114. Court may presume existence of certain facts. –– The Court may presume the existence of any
fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events,
human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
1. Ins. by the A.O. 1937, Part III of the Government of India Act 1935, came into force on the 1st April, 1937.
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 7.
3. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 12 (w.e.f. 5-1-1986).
Illustrations
The Court may presume ––
(a) that a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon, after the theft is either the thief or has
received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession;
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars;
(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good consideration;
(d) that a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a period shorter than
that within which such things or states of things usually cease to exist, is still in existence;
(e) that judicial and official acts have been regularly performed;
(f) that the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) that evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be unfavourable to the
person who withholds it;
(h) that if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled to answer by law, the answer,
if given, would be unfavourable to him;
(i) that when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the obligation has been
discharged.
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering whether such
maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it: ––
as to illustration (a) –– a shop-keeper has in his bill a marked rupee soon after it was stolen, and
cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually receiving rupees in the course of his
business;
as to illustration (b) ––A, a person of the highest character, is tried for causing a man’s death by an
act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B, a person of equally good character, who also took
part in the arrangement, describes precisely what was done, and admits and explains the common
carelessness of A and himself;
as to illustration (b) –– a crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C, three of the criminals,
are captured on the spot and kept apart from each other. Each gives an account of the crime implicating
D, and the accounts corroborate each other in such a manner as to render previous concert highly
improbable;
as to illustration (c) –– A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business. B, the acceptor,
was a young and ignorant person, completely under A’s influence;
as to illustration (d) –– it is proved that a river ran in a certain course five years ago, but it is known
that there have been floods since that time which might change its course;
as to illustration (e) –– a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was performed under
exceptional circumstances;
as to illustration (f) –– the question is, whether a letter was received. It is shown to have been posted,
but the usual course of the post was interrupted by disturbances;
as to illustration (g) –– a man refuses to produce a document which would bear on a contract of small
importance on which he is sued, but which might also injure the feelings and reputation of his family;
as to illustration (h) –– a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled by law to answer,
but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters unconnected with the matter in relation to which it
is asked;
as to illustration (i) –– a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the circumstances of the case are such
that he may have stolen it.
1[114A. Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for rape. ––In a prosecution
for rape under clause (a), clause (b), clause (c), clause (d), clause (e), clause (f), clause (g), clause (h),
clause (i), clause (j), clause (k), clause (l), clause (m) or clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 376 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is
whether it was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and such woman states in
her evidence before the court that she did not consent, the court shall presume that she did not consent.
Explanation.––In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned in clauses
(a) to (d) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]
STATE AMENDMENT
Chhattisgarh
Insertion of new Section 114B.––After section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, the following
shall be inserted, namely:––
114B. Presumption as to offences committed under section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section
354C, section 354D, section 509, section 509A or section 509B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.-When
the question is whether a person has committed an offence under Section 354, section 354A, section
354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 509, section 509A, or section 509B of the Indian Penal Code
and if the victim deposes before the court that she has been subjected to sexual harassment or her modesty
was outraged or she was disrobed or she was stalked or her privacy was intruded or she was sexually
harassed by any means, as the case may be, the court may, unless contrary is proved, presume that such
offence has been committed by that person.
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 14.]
CHAPTER VIII. –– ESTOPPEL
115. Estoppel.––When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused or
permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his
representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and such person or his
representative, to deny the truth of that thing.
Illustration
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that certain land belongs to A, and thereby induces B to
buy and pay for it.
The land afterwards becomes the property of A, and A seeks to set aside the sale on the ground that,
at the time of the sale, he had no title. He must not be allowed to prove his want of title.
116. Estoppel of tenants and of licensee of person in possession. –– No tenant of immovable
property, or person claiming through such tenant, shall, during the continuance of the tenancy, be
permitted to deny that the landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to such
immovable property; and no person who came upon any immovable property by the licence of the person
in possession there of shall be permitted to deny that such person had a title to such possession at the time
when such licence was given.
117. Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or licensee. –– No acceptor of a bill of
exchange shall be permitted to deny that the drawer had authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor
shall any bailee or licensee be permitted to deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the time when the
bailment or licence commenced, authority to make such bailment or grant such licence.
Explanation (1). ––  The acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny that the bill was really drawn by the
person by whom it purports to have been drawn.
Explanation (2). –– If a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a person other than the bailor, he may
prove that such person had a right to them as against the bailor.
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 26 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). Earlier it was inserted by 43 of 1983, s. 6, (w.e.f. 25-12-1983).
CHAPTER IX. –– OF WITNESSES
118. Who may testify. –– All persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court considers that
they are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from giving rational answers to those
questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body or mind, or any other cause of the
same kind.
Explanation. –– A lunatic is not incompetent to testify, unless he is prevented by his lunacy from
understanding the questions put to him and giving rational answers to them.
1[119. Witness unable to communicate verbally. –– A witness who is unable to speak may give his
evidence in any other manner in which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such
writing must be written and the signs made in open Court, evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral
evidence:
Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall take the assistance of
an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement, and such statement shall be video graphed.]
120. Parties to civil suit, and their wives or husbands. Husband or wife of person under
criminal trial. –– In all civil proceedings the parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any party to
the suit, shall be competent witnesses. In criminal proceedings against any person, the husband or wife of
such person, respectively, shall be a competent witness.
121. Judges and Magistrates. –– No Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the special order of
some Court to which he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any questions as to his own conduct in
Court as such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his knowledge in Court as such Judge
or Magistrate; but he may be examined as to other matters which occurred in his presence whilst he was
so acting.
Illustrations
(a) A, on his trial before the Court of Session, says that a deposition was improperly taken by B, the
Magistrate. B cannot be compelled to answer questions as to this, except upon the special order of a
superior Court.
(b) A is accused before the Court of Session of having given false evidence before B, a Magistrate. B
cannot be asked what A said, except upon the special order of the superior Court.
(c) A is accused before the Court of Session of attempting to murder a police-officer whilst on his
trial before B, a Sessions Judge. B may be examined as to what occurred.
122. Communications during marriage.––No person who is or has been married, shall be
compelled to disclose any communication made to him during marriage by any person to whom he is or
has been married; nor shall he be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person who
made it, or his representative in interest, consents, except in suits between married persons, or
proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime committed against the other.
123. Evidence as to affairs of State.––No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at
the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit.
124. Official communications.––No public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications
made to him in official confidence, when he considers that the public interests would suffer by the
disclosure.
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 27 for s. 119 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).
1[125. Information as to commission of offences. –– No Magistrate or police-officer shall be
compelled to say whence he got any information as to the commission of any offence, and no revenue-
officer shall be compelled to say whence he got any information as to the commission of any offence
against the public revenue.
Explanation.–– “Revenue-officer” in this section means any officer employed in or about the business
of any branch of the public revenue.]
126. Professional communications. –– No barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil, shall at any time be
permitted, unless with his client’s express consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the
course and for the purpose of his employment as such barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, by or on behalf
of his client, or to state the contents or condition of any document with which he has become acquainted
in the course and for the purpose of his professional employment, or to disclose any advice given by him
to his client in the course and for the purpose of such employment:
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure ––
(1) any such communication made in furtherance of any 2[illegal] purpose,
(2) any fact observed by any barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, in the course of his employment
as such, showing that any crime or fraud has been committed since the commencement of his
employment.
It is immaterial whether the attention of such barrister, 3[pleader], attorney or vakil was or was not
directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client.
Explanation. –– The obligation stated in this section continues after the employment has ceased.
Illustrations
(a) A, a client, says to B, an attorney –– “I have committed forgery, and I wish you to defend me.”
As the defence of a man known to be guilty is not a criminal purpose, this communication is
protected from disclosure.
(b) A, a client, says to B, an attorney –– “I wish to obtain possession of property by the use of a
forged deed on which I request you to sue.”
This communication, being made in furtherance of a criminal purpose, is not protected from
disclosure.
(c) A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, an attorney, to defend him. In the course of the
proceedings, B observes that an entry has been made in A’s account book, charging A with the sum said
to have been embezzled, which entry was not in the book at the commencement of his employment.
This being a fact observed by B in the course of his employment, showing that a fraud has been
committed since the commencement of the proceedings, it is not protected from disclosure.
127. Section 126 to apply to interpreters, etc. –– The provisions of section 126 shall apply to
interpreters, and the clerks or servants of barristers, pleaders, attorneys and vakils.
128. Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence. –– If any party to a suit gives evidence therein
at his own instance or otherwise, he shall not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure
as is mentioned in section 126; and, if any party to a suit or proceeding calls any such barrister,
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1887, s. 1, for the original s. 125.
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 10, for “criminal”.
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid.
1[pleader], attorney or vakil as a witness, he shall be deemed to have consented to such disclosure only if
he questions such barrister, attorney or vakil on matters which, but for such question, he would not be at
liberty to disclose.
129. Confidential communications with legal advisers. –– No one shall be compelled to disclose to
the Court any confidential communication which has taken place between him and his legal professional
adviser, unless he offers himself as a witness, in which case he may be compelled to disclose any such
communications as may appear to the Court necessary to be known in order to explain any evidence
which he has given, but no others.
130. Production of title-deeds of witness not a party. –– No witness who is not a party to a suit
shall be compelled to produce his title-deeds to any property, or any document in virtue of which he holds
any property as pledge or mortgagee or any document the production of which might tend to criminate
him, unless he has agreed in writing to produce them with the person seeking the production of such
deeds or some person through whom he claims.
2[131. Production of documents or electronic records which another person, having possession,
could refuse to produce. –– No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession or
electronic records under his control, which any other person would be entitled to refuse to produce if they
were in his possession or control, unless such last-mentioned person consents to their production.]
132. Witness not excused from answering on ground that answer will criminate. –– A witness
shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in any
suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon the ground that the answer to such question will
criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend
directly or indirectly to expose, such witness to a penalty or forfeiture of any kind:
Proviso. –– Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give, shall subject
him to any arrest or prosecution, or be proved against him in any criminal proceeding, except a
prosecution for giving false evidence by such answer.
133. Accomplice. –– An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person; and a
conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.
134. Number of witnesses. –– No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the
proof of any fact.
CHAPTER X. –– OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
135. Order of production and examination of witnesses. –– The order in which witnesses are
produced and examined shall be regulated by the law and practice for the time being relating to civil and
criminal procedure respectively, and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court.
136. Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence. ––When either party proposes to give evidence
of any fact, the Judge may ask the party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact, if
proved, would be relevant; and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the fact, if proved,
would be relevant, and not otherwise.
If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only upon proof of some
other fact, such last-mentioned fact must be proved before evidence is given of the fact first-mentioned,
unless the party undertakes to give proof of such fact, and the Court is satisfied with such undertaking.
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 10.
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Schedule, for “Section 131” (17-10-2000).
If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being first proved, the Judge
may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of the first fact to be given before the second fact is proved,
or require evidence to be given of the second fact before evidence is given of the first fact.
Illustrations
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by a person alleged to be dead, which
statement is relevant under section 32.
The fact that the person is dead must be proved by the person proposing to prove the statement,
before evidence is given of the statement.
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost.
The fact that the original is lost must be proved by the person proposing to produce the copy, before
the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have been stolen.
It is proposed to prove that he denied the possession of the property.
The relevancy of the denial depends on the identity of the property. The Court may, in its discretion,
either require the property to be identified before the denial of the possession is proved, or permit the
denial of the possession to be proved before the property is identified.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact (A) which is said to have been the cause or effect of fact in issue.
There are several intermediate facts (B, C and D) which must be shown to exist before the fact (A) can be
regarded as the cause or effect of the fact in issue. The Court may either permit A to be proved before B,
C or D is proved, or may require proof of B, C and D before permitting proof of A.
137. Examination-in-chief. –– The examination of witness by the party who calls him shall be called
his examination-in-chief.
Cross-examination. –– The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his
cross-examination.
Re-examination. ––The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination by the party
who called him, shall be called his re-examination.
138. Order of examinations. –– Witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief, then (if the adverse party
so desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined.
The examination and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts, but the cross-examination need
not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on his examination-in-chief.
Direction of re-examination. –– The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters
referred to in cross-examination; and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced in
re-examination, the adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter.
139. Cross-examination of person called to produce a document. –– A person summoned to
produce a document does not become a witness by the mere fact that he produces it, and cannot be
cross-examined unless and until he is called as a witness.
140. Witnesses to character. –– Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined.
141. Leading questions. –– Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it wishes
or expects to receive, is called a leading question.
142. When they must not be asked. –– Leading questions must not, if objected to by the adverse
party, be asked in an examination-in-chief, or in a re-examination, except with the permission of the
Court.
The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or undisputed, or which
have, in its opinion, been already sufficiently proved.
143. When they may be asked. –– Leading questions may be asked in cross-examination.
144. Evidence as to matters in writing. –– Any witness may be asked, whilst under examination,
whether any contract, grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not
contained in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any statement as to the
contents of any document, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the adverse party
may object to such evidence being given until such document is produced, or until facts have been proved
which entitle the party who called the witness to give secondary evidence of it.
Explanation. –– A witness may give oral evidence of statements made by other persons about the
contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts.
Illustration
The question is, whether A assaulted B.
C deposes that he heard A say to D––  “B wrote a letter accusing me of theft, and I will be revenged
on him.” This statement is relevant, as showing A’s motive for the assault, and evidence may be given of
it, though no other evidence is given about the letter.
1145. Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing. –– A witness may be cross-
examined as to previous statements made by him in writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to
matters in question, without such writing being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to
contradict him by the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts
of it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.
146. Questions lawful in cross-examination. –– When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in
addition to the questions hereinbefore referred to, be asked any questions which tend––
(1) to test his veracity,
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in life, or
(3) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although the answer to such questions might tend
directly or indirectly to criminate him, or might expose or tend directly or indirectly to expose him to
a penalty or forfeiture:
2[Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under section 376, 3[section 376A, section 376AB
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB] or section 376E of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of consent is an
issue, it shall not be permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination of the
victim as to the general immoral character, or previous sexual experience, of such victim with any person
for proving such consent or the quality of consent.]
1. As to the Application of s. 145 to police-diaries, see the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), s. 172.
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 28, for the proviso (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 9, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).
147. When witness to be compelled to answer.––If any such question relates to a matter relevant to
the suit or proceeding, the provisions of section 132 shall apply thereto.
148. Court to decide when question shall be asked and when witness compelled to answer. –– If
any such question relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding, except in so far as it affects the
credit of the witness by injuring his character, the Court shall decide whether or not the witness shall be
compelled to answer it, and may, if it thinks fit, warn the witness that he is not obliged to answer it. In
exercising its discretion, the Court shall have regard to the following considerations:––
(1) such questions are proper if they are of such a nature that the truth of the imputation conveyed
by them would seriously affect the opinion of the Court as to the credibility of the witness on the
matter to which he testifies;
(2) such questions are improper if the imputation which they convey relates to matters so remote
in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the imputation would not affect, or would affect in a
slight degree, the opinion of the Court as to the credibility of the witness on the matter to which he
testifies;
(3) such questions are improper if there is a great disproportion between the importance of the
imputation made against the witness’s character and the importance of his evidence;
(4) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the witness’s refusal to answer, the inference that the
answer if given would be unfavourable.
149. Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds.–– No such question as is referred to in
section 148 ought to be asked, unless the person asking it has reasonable grounds for thinking that the
imputation which it conveys is well-founded.
Illustrations
(a) A barrister is instructed by an attorney or vakil that an important witness is a dakait. This is a
reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dakait.
(b) A pleader is informed by a person in Court that an important witness is a dakait. The informant,
on being questioned by the pleader, gives satisfactory reasons for his statement. This is a reasonable
ground for asking the witness whether he is a dakait.
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known is asked at random whether he is a dakait. There
are here no reasonable ground for the question.
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being questioned as to his mode of life and
means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a reasonable ground for asking him if he is a
dakait.
150. Procedure of Court in case of question being asked without reasonable grounds.–– If the
Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable grounds, it may, if it was asked
by any barrister, pleader, vakil or attorney, report the circumstances of the case to the High Court or other
authority to which such barrister, pleader, vakil or attorney is subject in the exercise of his profession.
151. Indecent and scandalous questions.–– The Court may forbid any questions or inquiries which
it regards as indecent or scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing on the
questions before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters necessary to be known in
order to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed.
152. Questions intended to insult or annoy.–– The Court shall forbid any question which appears to
it to be intended to insult or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court needlessly
offensive in form.
153. Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions testing veracity. ––When a witness
has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant to the inquiry only in so far as it tends to
shake his credit by injuring his character, no evidence shall be given to contradict him; but, if he answers
falsely, he may after wards be charged with giving false evidence.
Exception 1.–– If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any crime and
denies it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2.–– If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality, and answers it
by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustrations
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud.
The claimant is asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He denies
it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim.
The evidence is inadmissible.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for dishonesty.
He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty.
The evidence is not admissible.
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Lahore.
A is asked whether he himself was not on that day at Calcutta. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that A was on that day at Calcutta.
The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which affects his credit, but as
contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on the day in question in Lahore.
In each of these cases the witness might, if his denial was false, be charged with giving false
evidence.
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a bloodfeud with the family of B against whom he gives
evidence.
He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the question tends to impeach his
impartiality.
154. Question by party to his own witness. ––1[(1)] The Court may, in its discretion, permit the
person who calls a witness to put any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by the
adverse party.
2[(2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the person so permitted under sub-section (1), to rely on
any part of the evidence of such witness.]
155. Impeaching credit of witness.––The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following
ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him:––
1. Section 154 numbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 2 of 2006, s. 9 (w.e.f. 16-4-2006).
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-4-2006).
(1) By the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of the witness,
believe him to be unworthy of credit;
(2) By proof that the witness has been bribed, or has 1[accepted] the offer of a bribe, or has
received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
(3) By proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence which is liable to be
contradicted;
2*
*
*
*
*
Explanation. –– A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may not, upon his
examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in cross-examination,
and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted, though, if they are false, he may afterwards be
charged with giving false evidence.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B.
C says that he delivered the goods to B.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he had not delivered goods to B.
The evidence is admissible.
(b) A is indicted for the murder of B.
C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the wound of which he died.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said that the wound was not given by A or
in his presence.
The evidence is admissible.
156. Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact, admissible. –– When a witness
whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any relevant fact, he may be questioned as to any
other circumstances which he observed at or near to the time or place at which such relevant fact
occurred, if the Court is of opinion that such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of
the witness as to the relevant fact which he testifies.
Illustration
A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in which he took part. He describes various
incidents unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the place where it was
committed.
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to corroborate his evidence as to the
robbery itself.
157. Former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate later testimony as to same
fact. –– In order to corroborate the testimony of a witness, any former statement made by such witness
relating to the same fact, at or about the time when the fact took place, or before any authority legally
competent to investigate the fact, may be proved.
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 11, for “had”
2. Clause (4) omitted by Act 4 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31-12-2002).
158. What matters may be proved in connection with proved statement relevant under section
32 or 33. ––Whenever any statement, relevant under section 32 or 33, is proved, all matters may be
proved either in order to contradict or to corroborate it, or in order to impeach or confirm the credit of the
person by whom it was made, which might have been proved if that person had been called as a witness
and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the matter suggested.
159. Refreshing memory.–– A witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory by
referring to any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is questioned,
or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time fresh in his
memory.
The witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other person, and read by the witness
within the time aforesaid, if when he read it he knew it to be correct.
When witness may use copy of document to refresh memory. –– Whenever a witness may refresh
his memory by reference to any document, he may, with the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of
such document:
Provided the Court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason for the non-production of the original.
An expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional treatises.
160. Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in section 159.––A witness may also testify
to facts mentioned in any such document as is mentioned in section 159, although he has no specific
recollection of the facts themselves, if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.
Illustration
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the course of business,
if he knows that the books were correctly kept, although he has forgotten the particular transactions
entered.
1161. Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory. –– Any writing referred to
under the provisions of the two last preceding sections must be produced and shown to the adverse party
if he requires it; such party may, if he pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.
162. Production of documents. –– A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in his
possession or power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its
production or to its admissibility. The validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the Court.
The Court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or take other
evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.
Translation of documents. ––If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be
translated, the Court may, if it thinks fit, direct the translator to keep the contents secret, unless the
document is to be given in evidence and, if the interpreter disobeys such direction, he shall be held to
have committed an offence under section 166 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
163. Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice. ––When a party calls
for a document which he has given the other party notice to produce, and such document is produced and
inspected by the party calling for its production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the party producing it
requires him to do so.
1. As to the application of s. 161 to police diaries, see the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974), s. 172.
164. Using, as evidence, of document production of which was refused on notice.–– When a party
refuses to produce a document which he has had notice to produce, he cannot afterwards use the
document as evidence without the consent of the other party or the order of the Court.
Illustration
A sues B on an agreement and gives B notice to produce it. At the trial, A calls for the document and
B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of its contents. B seeks to produce the document
itself to contradict the secondary evidence given by A, or in order to show that the agreement is not
stamped. He cannot do so.
165. Judge’s power to put questions or order production. –– The Judge may, in order to discover
or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts, ask any question he pleases, in any form, at any time, of any
witness, or of the parties about any fact relevant or irrelevant; and may order the production of any
document or thing; and neither the parties nor their agents shall be entitled to make any objection to any
such question or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to cross-examine any witness upon any answer
given in reply to any such question:
Provided that the judgment must be based upon facts declared by this Act to be relevant, and duly
proved:
Provided also that this section shall not authorize any Judge to compel any witness to answer any
question, or to produce any document which such witness would be entitled to refuse to answer or
produce under sections 121 to 131, both inclusive, if the question were asked or the document were called
for by the adverse party; nor shall the Judge ask any question which it would be improper for any other
person to ask under section 148 or 149; nor shall he dispense with primary evidence of any document,
except in the cases hereinbefore excepted.
166. Power of jury or assessors to put questions. –– In cases tried by jury or with assessors, the
jury or assessors may put any questions to the witnesses, through or by leave of the Judge, which the
Judge himself might put and which he considers proper.
CHAPTER XI–– OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE
167.  No new trial for improper admission or rejection of evidence. –– The improper admission or
rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself for a new trial or reversal of any decision in any case, if
it shall appear to the Court before which such objection is raised that, independently of the evidence
objected to and admitted, there was sufficient evidence to justify the decision, or that, if the rejected
evidence had been received, it ought not to have varied the decision.
THE SCHEDULE. –– [Enactments repealed.] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and
the Schedule.